DTNRG Chair
DTN Research Group                                              V. Cerf 
INTERNET-DRAFT                            MCI/Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
<draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-02.txt>                              S. Burleigh 
July 2004                                                      A. Hooke 
Expires January 2005                                       L. Torgerson 
                                         NASA/Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
                                                               R. Durst 
                                                               K. Scott 
                                                  The MITRE Corporation 
                                                                K. Fall 
                                                      Intel Corporation 
                                                               H. Weiss 
                                                           SPARTA, Inc. 
Delay-Tolerant Network Architecture 
 
Status of this Memo 
    
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, we certify that any applicable 
   patent or other IPR claims of which we am aware have been disclosed, 
   and any of which we become aware will be disclosed, in accordance 
   with RFC 3668. 
    
   This document is an Internet-Draft and is in full conformance with 
   Sections 5 and 6 of RFC3667 and Section 5 of RFC3668. 
    
   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.   
    
   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months 
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any 
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 
    
   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at  
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 
    
   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at  
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 
    
   This document was produced within the IRTF's Delay Tolerant 
   Networking Research Group (DTNRG).  See http://www.dtnrg.org for more 
   information. 
    
Abstract 
    
   This document describes an architecture for delay-tolerant networks, 
   and is a generalization of the architecture originally designed for 
   the Interplanetary Internet: a communication system to provide 
   Internet-like services across interplanetary distances in support of 
   deep space exploration.  This document describes a generalization of 
   this architecture that addresses a variety of internetworks with 
   operational and performance characteristics that make conventional 
   (Internet-like) networking approaches either unworkable or 
   impractical.  We define a message-oriented overlay that exists above 
   the transport layer of the networks on which it is hosted.  The 
Internet Draft       draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-02.txt            July 2004 
 
   document presents an architectural overview followed by discussions 
   of services, topology, routing, security, reliability and state 
   management. 



















































 
Cerf, et al.             Expires January 2005                 [Page 2] 
Internet Draft       draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-02.txt            July 2004 
 
Table of Contents 
   Status of this Memo................................................1 
   Abstract...........................................................1 
   Table of Contents..................................................3 
   1     Introduction.................................................5 
   2     Why an Architecture for Delay-Tolerant Networking?...........5 
   3     DTN Architectural Description................................6 
         3.1  The DTN Architecture is Based on Virtual Message Switching
               ........................................................6 
         3.2  DTN Classes of Service Mimic Postal Operation...........7 
         3.3  DTN Postal-Style Delivery Options.......................8 
         3.4  Nodes and Applications..................................9 
         3.5  Regions................................................10 
         3.6  Endpoint Identifiers (Endpoint IDs)....................11 
         3.7  Late Binding...........................................11 
         3.8  Routing and Forwarding.................................11 
         3.9  Fragmentation and Reassembly...........................13 
         3.10 Reliability and Custody Transfer.......................13 
         3.11 Time Stamps and Time Synchronization...................13 
         3.12 Congestion and Flow Control at the Bundle Layer........14 
         3.13 Security...............................................15 
   4     State Management Considerations.............................16 
         4.1  Registration State.....................................16 
         4.2  Custody Transfer State.................................17 
         4.3  Bundle Routing and Forwarding State....................17 
         4.4  Security-Related State.................................17 
   5     Application Structuring Issues..............................18 
   6     Convergence Layer Considerations for Use of Underlying 
         Protocols...................................................19 
   7     Summary.....................................................19 
   8     Security Considerations.....................................20 
   9     IANA Considerations.........................................20 
   10    Normative References........................................20 
   11    Informative References......................................20 
    



















 
Cerf, et al.             Expires January 2005                 [Page 3] 
Internet Draft       draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-02.txt            July 2004 
 
Acknowledgments 
    
   John Wroclawski, David Mills, Greg Miller, James P. G. Sterbenz, Joe 
   Touch, Steven Low, Lloyd Wood, Robert Braden, Deborah Estrin, Stephen 
   Farrell, Melissa Ho, Ting Liu, and Craig Partridge all contributed 
   useful thoughts and criticisms to previous versions of this document.  
   We are grateful for their time and participation. 
    
   This work was performed in part under DOD Contract DAA-B07-00-CC201, 
   DARPA AO H912; JPL Task Plan No. 80-5045, DARPA AO H870; and NASA 
   Contract NAS7-1407. 
    
Release Notes 
    
draft-irtf-ipnrg-arch-00.txt, May 2001:  
    
   Original Issue. 
    
draft-irtf-ipnrg-arch-01.txt, August 2002:  
    
   -Restructured document to generalize architecture for delay-tolerant 
     networking. 
   -Refined DTN classes of service and delivery options.  Added a 
     "reply-to" address to have response information such as error 
     messages or end-to-end acks directed to a source-specified third 
     party. 
   -Further defined the topological elements of delay tolerant networks. 
   -Elaborated routing and reliability considerations. 
   -Initial model for securing the delay tolerant network 
     infrastructure. 
   -Expanded discussion of flow and congestion control. 
   -Added section discussing state information at the bundle layer. 
   -Updated bundle header information and end-to-end data transfer. 
    
draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-00.txt, March 2003:   
    
   -Revised model for delay tolerant network infrastructure security. 
   -Introduced fragmentation and reassembly to the architecture. 
   -Removed significant amounts of rationale and redundant text.  Moved 
     bundle transfer example(s) to separate draft(s). 
    
draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-02.txt, July 2004: 
   -Revised assumptions about reachability within DTN regions. 
   -Added management endpoint identifiers for nodes. 
   -Removed list of bundle header information as it will be contained in 
     the protocol specification document. 








 
Cerf, et al.             Expires January 2005                 [Page 4] 
Internet Draft       draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-02.txt            July 2004 
 
1  Introduction 
    
   This document describes an architecture for Delay and Disconnection-
   Tolerant interoperable networking.  The architecture embraces the 
   concepts of occasionally-connected networks that may suffer from 
   frequent partitions and that may be comprised of more than one 
   divergent set of protocol families.  The basis for this architecture 
   lies with that of the Interplanetary Internet, which focused 
   primarily on the issue of deep space communication in high-delay 
   environments.  We expect the current DTN architecture described here 
   to be utilized in various high-delay and unusual environments; the 
   case of deep space is one of these, and is still being pursued as a 
   specialization of this architecture (See http://www.ipnsig.org and 
   [SB03] for more details).  Other networks to which we believe this 
   architecture applies include sensor-based networks using scheduled 
   intermittent connectivity, classes of terrestrial wireless networks 
   that cannot ordinarily maintain end-to-end connectivity, and more 
   "conventional" internets with long delays.  A DTN tutorial [FW03], 
   aimed at introducing DTN and the types of networks for which it is 
   designed, is available to introduce new readers to the fundamental 
   concepts and motivation.  More technical descriptions may be found in 
   [KF03] and [JFP04].  
    
   We define an end-to-end message-oriented overlay called the "bundle 
   layer" that exists at a layer above the transport layers of the 
   networks on which it is hosted and below applications. This overlay 
   employs persistent storage at intermediate nodes (DTN routers), 
   includes a hop-by-hop transfer of reliable delivery responsibility 
   and optional end-to-end acknowledgement.  For interoperability, it 
   includes a flexible naming scheme (based on URIs) capable of 
   encapsulating different naming schemes in the same overall naming 
   format.  It also has a basic security model aimed at protecting 
   infrastructure from unauthorized use.  In a sense, it represents a 
   networking architecture among application-layer gateways or proxies 
   that employ store-and-forward message routing to overcome 
   communication disruptions. 
    
   Nodes unable to support the full capabilities required by this 
   architecture may be supported by application layer proxies, acting as 
   DTN applications.  In particular, the DTN naming scheme is able to 
   carry endpoint identifiers in an opaque fashion, thereby supporting 
   references to non-DTN capable endpoints where required. 
    
2  Why an Architecture for Delay-Tolerant Networking? 
    
   The reason for pursuing an architecture for delay tolerant networking 
   stems from several factors.  These factors are summarized below; much 
   more detail on their rationale can be explored in [SB03,KF03,DFS02]. 
    
   The existing Internet Protocols do not work well for some 
   environments, due to some fundamental assumptions built into the 
   Internet architecture: 


 
Cerf, et al.             Expires January 2005                 [Page 5] 
Internet Draft       draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-02.txt            July 2004 
 
   - that an end-to-end path between source and destination exists for 
      the duration of the communication session  
   - (for reliable communication) that the maximum round-trip time over 
      that path is not excessive and not highly variable from packet to 
      packet 
   - that the end-to-end loss is relatively small 
   - that all routers and end stations support the TCP/IP protocols 
   - that applications need not worry about communication performance 
   - that endpoint-based security mechanisms are sufficient for meeting 
      most security concerns 
    
   In light of these issues, the DTN architecture is conceived based on 
   a number of design principles that are summarized here (and further 
   discussed in [KF03], as mentioned above): 
    
   - provide a coarse-grained class of service and delivery options 
      based on services provided by the US (and other) postal systems 
   - use variable-length (possibly long) messages (not streams or 
      limited-sized packets) as the communication abstraction to help 
      enhance the ability of the network to make good scheduling/path 
      selection decisions 
   - encourage applications to minimize round-trip exchanges 
   - guide application design to cope with application restart after 
      failure while network transactions remain pending 
   - use storage within the network to support store-and-forward 
      operation over potentially long timescales (i.e. to support 
      operation in environments where no end-to-end path may ever exist) 
   - provide security mechanisms that protect the infrastructure from 
      unauthorized use 
    
3  DTN Architectural Description  
    
   The previous section summarized the design principles that guide the 
   definition of the DTN architecture.  This section presents a 
   description of the design decisions that result from those design 
   principles. 
    
3.1 The DTN Architecture is Based on Virtual Message Switching 
    
   A DTN-enabled application transmits application-layer messages of 
   arbitrary length (subject to any implementation limitations). Their 
   relative order may not be preserved.  Messages are transformed into 
   protocol "bundles" that may contain whatever the requesting 
   application wishes to send. Messages are sent by and delivered to 
   applications in an atomic fashion, although bundles may be split up 
   during transmission.  Message senders and recipients are identified 
   by (variable-length) endpoint identifiers (described below).  Bundles 
   may also contain an optional "report-to" endpoint identifier used 
   when special operations are requested to direct diagnostic output to 
   an entity other than the sender.   
    
   A message-oriented abstraction provides the bundle layer with a-
   priori knowledge of the size and performance requirements of 
 
Cerf, et al.             Expires January 2005                 [Page 6] 
Internet Draft       draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-02.txt            July 2004 
 
   requested data transfers.  When there is a significant amount of 
   queuing that can occur prior to transmission over an outbound route 
   (as is the case in the DTN version of store-and-forward) the 
   advantage provided by knowing this information may be significant for 
   making scheduling decisions [JFP04].  An alternative abstraction 
   (i.e. of stream-based delivery) would make such scheduling very 
   difficult.  Although packets provide some of the same benefits as 
   messages, larger aggregates provide a way for the network to apply 
   scheduling and buffer management to entire units of data that are 
   useful to applications.  
    
3.2 DTN Classes of Service Mimic Postal Operation 
    
   The (U.S. or similar) Postal Service provides a strong metaphor for 
   the services offered by a delay-tolerant network.  Traffic is 
   generally not interactive and may be one-way.  There are generally no 
   strong guarantees of timely delivery, yet there are some forms of 
   class of service and security.   
    
   The DTN architecture, like most postal services, offers *relative* 
   measures of priority (low, medium, high) for carrying traffic.  It 
   may also offer basic notifications, for example: "the intended 
   recipient has accepted delivery of the message," "the route taken by 
   this message is as follows..." and "the message has been 
   transmitted." 
    
   An essential element of the postal service style of operation for 
   networking is that messages have a place to wait in a queue until an 
   outbound communication opportunity ("contact") is available.  This 
   highlights the following assumptions: 
    
    1. that storage is available and well-distributed throughout the 
      network  
    2. that storage is sufficiently persistent and robust to store 
      messages until forwarding can occur, and 
    3. (implicitly) that this 'store-and-forward' model is a better 
      choice than attempting to effect continuous connectivity or other 
      alternatives 
    
   For a network to effectively support the DTN architecture, these 
   assumptions must be considered and must be found to hold. 
 
   We have currently defined three relative classes of service in the 
   DTN architecture.  The class of service for a bundle implies some 
   relative scheduling prioritization among bundles headed for the same 
   next hop at a router: 
    
   - Bulk - Bulk bundles are shipped on a "best effort" basis.  No 
      bundles of this class will be shipped until all bundles of other 
      classes bound for the same next hop destination have been shipped.   
   - Normal - Normal class bundles are shipped prior to any bulk class 
      bundles. 


 
Cerf, et al.             Expires January 2005                 [Page 7] 
Internet Draft       draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-02.txt            July 2004 
 
   - Expedited - Expedited bundles, in general, are shipped prior to 
      bundles of other classes.  However, the bundle layer *may* 
      implement a queue service discipline that prevents starvation of 
      the normal class, which may result in some normal bundles being 
      shipped (in full or in part) before expedited bundles bound. 
    
   Applications specify their requested class of service.  This request, 
   coupled with policy applied at DTN routers, affects the overall 
   likelihood and timeliness of message delivery. 
    
3.3 DTN Postal-Style Delivery Options  
    
   Applications may request any of the following five delivery options: 
    
   - Custodial Delivery - a bundle will be transmitted by the bundle 
      layer using reliable transport protocols (if available), and the 
      point of reliable delivery responsibility (i.e. retransmission 
      buffer) will advance through the network from one custodian to 
      another until the bundle reaches its destination.  The bundle 
      layer depends on the underlying transport protocols of the 
      networks that it operates over to provide the primary means of 
      reliable transfer from one bundle layer to the next.  However, 
      when custodial delivery is requested, the bundle layer provides an 
      additional coarse-grained timeout and retransmission mechanism and 
      an accompanying (bundle-layer) hop-by-hop acknowledgment 
      mechanism.  When a bundle application does *not* request custodial 
      delivery, this bundle layer timeout and retransmission mechanism 
      is not employed, and successful bundle layer delivery depends 
      solely on the reliability mechanisms of the underlying transport 
      layers 
   - Return Receipt - a return-receipt bundle is issued by the 
      receiving DTN implementation when the (arriving) subject bundle is 
      consumed *by the destination application* (not simply the 
      destination bundle layer).  The receipt is issued to the entity 
      specified in the source endpoint ID of the subject bundle or the 
      designated alternate (report-to field) if present.  This provides 
      the ability to collect diagnostic information at locations other 
      than the sender.  The return receipt uses the same custodial 
      delivery option setting used in the subject bundle.  (Return 
      receipts are never issued with the return receipt delivery option 
      requested, to avoid "return receipt storms.")  
   - Forwarding Indication - sent by a DTN router when the last 
      fragment (in terms of time) of a bundle has been forwarded.  The 
      indication is sent to the report-to destination if specified, and 
      to the source endpoint ID of the subject bundle otherwise 
   - Custody Transfer Indication - same as forwarding indication, but 
      sent when a custodial transfer has successfully completed 
   - Secured Delivery - indicates the application has provided 
      authentication material along with its message send request. To 
      operate under general circumstances, applications should be 
      prepared to supply authentication credentials and request secured 
      delivery.  Local policy determines whether any bundles may be sent 
      lacking the security option, and portions of the network beyond 
 
Cerf, et al.             Expires January 2005                 [Page 8] 
Internet Draft       draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-02.txt            July 2004 
 
      the originating portion may require security even if the 
      originating portion does not. 
 
- Applications always specify the following information when sending a 
  message: 
 
  - Expiration Time ¡ indicates the time at which the message is no 
     longer useful.  If a bundle is stored in the network when its 
     expiration time is reached, it may be discarded.  Expiration times 
     are expressed as an offset relative to the current time of day, 
     which is assumed to be known by all DTN nodes (also see time 
     synchronization, below) 
 
  - Source Endpoint ID ¡ an identifying name of the (original) sender 
 
  - Destination Endpoint ID ¡ an identifying name of the final intended 
     recipient 
 
  - Report-To Endpoint ID ¡ an identifying name of where reports 
     (return-receipt, route-tracing functions) should be sent.  If not 
     present, reports are sent to the Source Endpoint ID. 
    
3.4 Nodes and Applications 
    
   A DTN node (or simply "node" in this document) is an engine for 
   sending and receiving bundles.  Applications utilize DTN nodes to 
   send or receive messages carried in bundles (or act as report-to 
   destinations for diagnostic information carried in bundles).  
   Applications utilize DTN nodes to bind to Endpoint IDs.    Each 
   Endpoint ID contains a region naming portion (see below) and an 
   administrative naming portion, denoted in aggregate as {R, A}.  In 
   addition, each node is uniquely identified by at least one Management 
   Endpoint ID (MEI).  A DTN node is said to be "in" a region R1 if at 
   least one of its MEIs contains a region naming portion R such that 
   R=R1.  MEIs are necessary for generating custody acknowledgments to 
   the bundle layer itself and for other administrative purposes. 
    
   An application may attempt to use a node to bind to arbitrary 
   Endpoint IDs, but attempts may fail.  For example, if an application 
   attempts to bind to an Endpoint ID containing a region that the node 
   is not in, the attempt will likely fail. 
     












 
Cerf, et al.             Expires January 2005                 [Page 9] 
Internet Draft       draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-02.txt            July 2004 
 
    
3.5 Regions 
    
   The DTN architecture defines a "network of internets" comprised of 
   "DTN regions."  Placing a DTN node in a particular region is an 
   administrative decision, and may be influenced by differences in 
   protocol families, connection dynamics, or administrative policies.  
   Regions may also be delimited based upon other criteria, such as 
   trust boundaries [NEWARCH] or global/local address partitions [IPNL, 
   TRIAD].  Each DTN region has a unique name (the R of the {R, A} 
   above). 
    
   DTN routers are somewhat similar to the gateways described in the 
   original ARPANET/Internet designs [CK74].  They differ from ARPANET 
   gateways because they operate above the transport layer and are 
   focused on virtual message forwarding rather than packet switching.  
   However, both DTN routers and ARPANET gateways generally provide 
   interoperability between underlying protocols specific to one 
   environment and the protocols specific to another, and both provide a 
   store-and-forward forwarding service (with DTN routers employing 
   persistent storage for their store and forward function). 
    
   Regions are a key concept in the DTN architecture.  They provide a 
   separation of name spaces, and may be useful for partitioning routing 
   information or applying specific policies. 
 
   The following list identifies the requirements for DTN regions and 
   nodes within them: 
    
  1. Each DTN region shall have an identifier space (the A portion of 
     the {R, A} Entity ID above) that is allocated among all DTN nodes 
     within the region. 
  2. Each node in a region R1 is free to interpret the administrative 
     portion A for Endpoint IDs of the form {R1, A} in making routing 
     and/or policy decisions. Furthermore, any node not in R1 must treat 
     A as "opaque" (i.e. it cannot interpret A). 
  3. Every node in a region R1 shall have the ability to eventually 
     deliver messages to every other node in R1 (possibly through the 
     use of intermediate forwarding nodes)  
    
   Using these rules, significant flexibility is attained in the 
   structuring of administrative identifiers.  They might, for example, 
   be built on DNS names, or URIs, or might look like "expressions of 
   interest" or forms of database-like queries as in a directed 
   diffusion-routed network [IGE00] or in intentional naming [WSBL99]. 
     








 
Cerf, et al.             Expires January 2005                [Page 10] 
Internet Draft       draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-02.txt            July 2004 
 
 
3.6 Endpoint Identifiers (Endpoint IDs) 
    
   An Endpoint Identifier comprises two portions: a region identifier 
   and administrative naming portion, denoted {R, A}.  Regions are named 
   by applications using syntax identical to that used in the domain 
   name system (DNS). (That is, hierarchical tree structure, dot-
   separated text node names, left to right progress from leaf to root, 
   sibling nodes must have different names.)   
    
3.7 Late Binding 
    
   The term binding here means interpreting the administrative 
   identifier A in {R, A} for the purpose of forwarding the associated 
   message to {R, A}.  Late binding means that this interpretation is 
   not performed until the message reaches a node in region R, per rule 
   2 of section 3.5. 
    
   In a disconnected network, late binding may be advantageous because 
   the transit time of a message may exceed the validity time of a 
   binding.  In addition, it may help to reduce loading in the network 
   by limiting the scope of binding meta-data propagation (e.g., DNS 
   zone transfers). 
    
3.8 Routing and Forwarding 
 
   The DTN architecture provides a framework for routing and forwarding 
   among DTN nodes.  Interconnections among DTN nodes can be described 
   with a *directed, time-varying* graph, as communication capabilities 
   cannot be assumed to be symmetric with respect to performance or 
   time.  An edge in this graph represents a communication relationship 
   between two DTN nodes, typically based on a shared interconnection 
   technology.  The performance characteristics of an edge may vary over 
   time.  Estimates of these characteristics are represented by 
   "contacts" that indicate the anticipated performance (e.g. latency, 
   and forwarding capacity of that edge) over time.  A route is a 
   sequence of edge choices used for transferring messages through the 
   topology graph. 
 
3.8.1  Types of Contacts 
    
   DTNs may be required to function in the presence of any or all of the 
   following types of contacts: 
    
   Persistent Contacts 
    
   Persistent contacts are always available (i.e., no DTN action is 
   required to initiate a persistent contact).  DTN protocols operating 
   over a Digital Subscriber Line (DSL) or other "always-on" connection 
   would be an example. 
    
   On-Demand Contacts 
    
 
Cerf, et al.             Expires January 2005                [Page 11] 
Internet Draft       draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-02.txt            July 2004 
 
   On-Demand contacts require some DTN action in order to instantiate, 
   but then function as persistent contacts until terminated. A dial-up 
   connection is an example of an On-Demand contact (at least, from the 
   viewpoint of the dialer; it may be viewed as an Opportunistic Contact 
   ¡ below ¡ from the viewpoint of the dial-up service provider). 
    
   Intermittent - Scheduled Contacts 
    
   A scheduled contact is an agreement to establish a link between two 
   points at a particular time, for a particular duration.  An example 
   of an edge with scheduled contacts is a link that uses a low-earth 
   orbiting relay satellite.  The edge's list of contacts can be 
   constructed from the satellite's schedule of view times, capacities 
   and latencies. 
    
   Intermittent - Opportunistic Contacts 
    
   Opportunistic contacts are not scheduled, but rather present 
   themselves unexpectedly.  For example, an aircraft flying overhead 
   and beaconing, advertising its availability for communication would 
   present an opportunistic contact eligible to carry bundles. Another 
   type of opportunistic contact might be via an infrared or BlueTooth 
   communication link between a personal digital assistant (PDA) and a 
   kiosk in an airport concourse. The opportunistic contact begins as 
   the PDA is brought near the kiosk, lasting an indefinite amount of 
   time (i.e., until the link is lost or terminated).  
    
   Intermittent - Predicted Contacts 
    
   Predicted contacts are based on no fixed schedule, but rather are 
   predictions of likely contact times and durations based on a history 
   of previously observed contacts.  Given a great enough confidence in 
   a predicted contact, routes may be chosen based on this information. 
    
   An Example 
    
   A PDA receiving GSM/GPRS data service in an airport concourse comes 
   into contact with a kiosk via BlueTooth communication, forming an 
   opportunistic contact. During this contact, knowledge of the 
   geography of the concourse and the mobility pattern of the PDA is 
   used to compute probable future contacts with other kiosks (perhaps 
   based on the PDA owner's walking speed and the kiosks' coverage 
   areas).  The PDA is then free to use both the GPRS data service (a 
   persistent contact) and the predicted set of kiosk contacts to 
   deliver its waiting bundles according to the user's personal 
   optimization criteria.  The user's criteria might be sensitive to 
   bandwidth, latency, cost, or other factors. 
    
3.8.2  Store-and-forward operation 
    
   While IP networks are based on "store-and-forward" operation, there 
   is an assumption that the "storing" will not persist for more than a 
   modest amount of queuing and transmission delay.  In contrast, the 
 
Cerf, et al.             Expires January 2005                [Page 12] 
Internet Draft       draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-02.txt            July 2004 
 
   DTN architecture does not expect that outbound links are always 
   available, and instead expects to store received messages for some 
   time.  We anticipate that most DTN nodes will use some form of 
   persistent storage for this -- disk, flash memory, etc., and that 
   stored messages will survive system restarts. 
    
   The availability of persistent storage allows the next-hop forwarding 
   decision to potentially be modified prior to transmission.  In 
   particular, if a future contact is chosen for routing and some other 
   superior contact becomes known, the routing decision could be 
   changed. 
    
3.9 Fragmentation and Reassembly 
    
    DTN fragmentation and reassembly is designed to improve the 
    efficiency of message transfers by ensuring that contacts are fully 
    utilized and by avoiding re-transmission of partially-forwarded 
    messages.  There are two forms of DTN fragmentation/reassembly:     
    
     Any DTN node may ¡proactively- divide a block of application data 
     into multiple smaller blocks and transmit each such block as an 
     independent message.  In this case the *final destination(s)* are 
     responsible for extracting the smaller blocks from incoming 
     messages and reassembling them into the original large block. 
      
     DTN nodes sharing an edge may -reactively- fragment a message 
     cooperatively when a message is only partially transferred.  In 
     this case, the receiving node modifies the incoming message to 
     indicate it is a fragment, and forwards it normally.  The previous-
     hop sender may learn that only a portion of the message was 
     delivered to the next hop, and send the remaining portion when 
     subsequent contacts become available. 
 
3.10 Reliability and Custody Transfer 
    
   The bundle layer provides unacknowledged, best-effort message 
   delivery.  It also provides two options for enhancing delivery 
   reliability:  end-to-end acknowledgment and custodial transmission 
   (with DTN retransmission if required). Applications wishing to 
   implement their own end-to-end message retransmission mechanisms are 
   free to utilize the acknowledgment. 
    
   Custody transfer allows the source to delegate retransmission 
   responsibility and recover its retransmission-related resources 
   relatively soon after sending the bundle (on the order of a round-
   trip time to the first bundle hop).  Not all nodes in a DTN are 
   required by the DTN architecture to accept custody transfers.  In 
   particular, some nodes may have sufficient storage resources to 
   sometimes act as custodians, but may elect to not offer such services 
   when congested. 
    
3.11 Time Stamps and Time Synchronization 
    
 
Cerf, et al.             Expires January 2005                [Page 13] 
Internet Draft       draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-02.txt            July 2004 
 
   The DTN architecture depends on time synchronization (supported by 
   external, region-local protocols) for three primary purposes: bundle 
   identification, routing with scheduled or predicted contacts, and 
   bundle expiration time computations.  These are supported by placing 
   a time stamp and an explicit expiration field (expressed in seconds 
   after the source time stamp) in each bundle header.  The source 
   timestamp on an arriving bundle is made available to consuming 
   applications by an API (specified elsewhere).   
    
   Each bundle is required to contain a time stamp unique to the bundle 
   sender's endpoint ID.  The concatenation of the Source Endpoint ID 
   and the time stamp serves as a unique identifier for a particular 
   bundle, and is used for a number of purposes, including custody 
   transfer and reassembly of bundle fragments. 
    
3.12 Congestion and Flow Control at the Bundle Layer 
    
   The subject of congestion control and flow control at the bundle 
   layer is one on which the authors of this document have not yet 
   reached complete consensus.  We have unresolved concerns about the 
   efficiency and efficacy of congestion and flow control schemes 
   implemented across long and/or highly variable delay environments, 
   especially with the custody transfer mechanism that may require nodes 
   to retain messages for long periods of time.  
 
   One view of congestion control is as follows:  "Congestion control is 
   concerned with allocating the resources in a network such that the 
   network can operate at an acceptable performance level when the 
   demand exceeds or is near the capacity of the network resources. 
   These resources include bandwidths of links, buffer space (memory), 
   and processing capacity at intermediate nodes.  Congestion occurs 
   when the demand is greater than the available resources." [RJ90]  
    
   For the purposes of this document, we define "flow control" as a 
   means of assuring that the rate at which a sending node transmits 
   data to a receiving node does not exceed the maximum rate at which 
   the receiving node is prepared to receive data from that sender. 
   (Note that this is a generalized notion of flow control, rather than 
   one that applies only to end-to-end communication.)  We define 
   "congestion control" as a means of assuring that the aggregate rate 
   at which all traffic sources inject data into a network does not 
   exceed the maximum aggregate rate at which the network can deliver 
   data to destination nodes.  If flow control is propagated backward 
   from destination nodes to routers and eventually back to traffic 
   sources, then flow control can be at least a partial solution to the 
   problem of congestion as well. 
    
   DTN flow control decisions must be made within the bundling layer 
   itself based on information about resources (in this case, primarily 
   persistent storage) available within the bundle node.  However, the 
   bundle layer *might* be able to delegate the implementation of those 
   decisions to the underlying transport protocols. 
    
 
Cerf, et al.             Expires January 2005                [Page 14] 
Internet Draft       draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-02.txt            July 2004 
 
   The problem of flow control between nodes separated by very large 
   signal propagation times remains to be solved: TCP's flow control and 
   congestion control facilities could be leveraged within regions 
   characterized by small round-trip times, but at this time no 
   comparable protocol exists for very long delay paths.  It remains as 
   an exercise to demonstrate that a (DTN) hop-by-hop flow control 
   scheme in long and/or highly variable delay environments can effect 
   end-to-end congestion control in a fair and efficient manner. 
 
3.13 Security 
    
   Resource scarcity in delay-tolerant networks dictates that some form 
   of access control to the network itself is required in many 
   circumstances.  It is not acceptable for an unauthorized user to 
   flood the network with traffic easily, possibly denying service to 
   authorized users.  Implicit in this statement is a requirement for 
   some form of admission control and/or in-network authentication 
   sensitive to the requested class of service. 
    
   Many existing authorization and access control protocols designed for 
   operation in low-delay, connected environments may not perform well 
   in DTNs.  In particular, the following common operations are 
   potentially much more difficult: updating remote access control lists 
   and revoking ("blacklisting") credentials.  The consequences of these 
   difficulties include delays in the onset of communication, delays in 
   detecting and recovering from system compromise, and delays in 
   completing transactions due to inappropriate access control or 
   authentication settings.   
    
   To help satisfy these security requirements, each bundle includes an 
   immutable signature containing a verifiable identity of the sender 
   and other conventional cryptographic material to verify accuracy of 
   the message content. DTN nodes discard traffic as early as possible 
   if authentication or access control checks fail.  This approach has 
   the associated benefit of making denial-of-service attacks 
   considerably harder to mount as compared with conventional Internet 
   routers.  However, the obvious cost is potentially larger computation 
   and storage overhead required at DTN nodes. 
    
   Our basis for authorization and authentication uses asymmetric 
   cryptography as a starting point for keying, and requires one or more 
   trusted credential-issuing authorities.  Each node is issued initial 
   configuration information usable to assess the validity of 
   credentials it will be presented with in the future (e.g. a 
   certificate authority's public key). 
    
   An application presents verifiable public information (e.g. a signed 
   public key) along with a message to be carried and class of service 
   requested, signed with corresponding private information (e.g. 
   matching private key).  If required by local policy, one or more DTN 
   nodes verify the sender's identity, and perform access control checks 
   against the requested class of service.  Valid messages accepted for 
   the specified class of service are then forwarded. 
 
Cerf, et al.             Expires January 2005                [Page 15] 
Internet Draft       draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-02.txt            July 2004 
 
    
   In [DSEC], only first-hop routers need to cache per-user information, 
   and then only for adjacent users.  Non-edge "core" routers can rely 
   on the authentication of upstream routers to verify the authenticity 
   of messages.  This approach may help to improve the scalability of 
   key management for these networks, as it will limit the number of 
   cached public credentials to a function of the number of adjacent 
   routers rather than the number of end users. This should provide both 
   the obvious advantage of space savings, but also an improvement to 
   system management as router keys are expected to be changed less 
   frequently than end user keys.  As DTN routers are likely to be 
   deployed in remote areas, re-keying operations may be comparatively 
   burdensome system management tasks, so limiting the number and 
   frequency of certificate updates should provide additional savings. 
    
   This approach is partially susceptible to compromised routers. If an 
   otherwise-legitimate router is compromised, it would be able to 
   utilize network resources at an arbitrary class of service setting 
   and send traffic purportedly originating from any user whose identity 
   is known to the router.  However, if the message signature is carried 
   end-to-end (an option for DTN security), a legitimate user could 
   repudiate the origin of any traffic generated in this manner. 
   Thus, we believe a reasonable trade-off is to admit the possibility 
   that a compromised router could launch a denial-of-service attack in 
   order to gain the scalability benefits of not checking end-user 
   credentials at every hop. 
    
   Note that the end-to-end signatures suggested above may be checked at 
   selected nodes in a DTN that wish to favor stricter security over 
   scalability.  In any case, local policy dictates the credentials a 
   DTN router is required to check. 
 
4  State Management Considerations 
    
   An important aspect of any networking architecture is its management 
   of state information.  This section describes the state information 
   managed at the bundle layer and discusses how it is established and 
   removed. 
    
4.1 Registration State 
    
   In long/variable delay environments, an asynchronous application 
   interface seems most appropriate. Such interfaces typically include 
   methods for applications to register callback actions when certain 
   triggering events occur (e.g. messages arrive).  These registrations 
   create state information called registration state. 
    
   Registration state is typically created by explicit request of the 
   application, and is removed by a separate explicit request, and is 
   thus "hard" state. In most cases, there must be a provision for 
   retaining this state across application and operating system 
   termination/restart conditions because a client/server message round-
   trip time may exceed the requesting application's execution time (or 
 
Cerf, et al.             Expires January 2005                [Page 16] 
Internet Draft       draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-02.txt            July 2004 
 
   hosting system's uptime).  In cases where applications are not 
   automatically restarted but registration state remains persistent, a 
   method must be provided to indicate to the system what action to 
   perform when the triggering event occurs (e.g. restarting some 
   application, ignoring the event, etc.).  
    
   As part of registration state, an endpoint ID for which an 
   application wishes to receive messages must be specified.  This 
   operation is somewhat analogous to the bind() operation in the common 
   sockets API. 
    
4.2 Custody Transfer State 
    
   Custody transfer state includes information required to keep account 
   of bundles for which a node has taken custody, as well as the 
   protocol state related to transferring custody for one or more of 
   them.  The accounting-related state is created when a bundle is 
   received.  Custody transfer retransmission state is created when a 
   transfer of custody is initiated by forwarding a bundle requiring 
   enhanced reliability.  Retransmission state and accounting state are 
   released upon receipt of one or more acknowledgements, indicating 
   custody has been moved.  In addition, the bundle's expiration time 
   (possibly mitigated by local policy) provides an upper bound on the 
   time when this state is purged from the system in the event that it 
   is not purged explicitly due to acknowledgment. 
 
4.3 Bundle Routing and Forwarding State 
    
   As with the Internet architecture, we distinguish between routing and 
   forwarding.  Routing refers to the execution of a (possibly 
   distributed) algorithm for computing routing paths according to some 
   objective function (see [JFP04], for example).  Forwarding refers to 
   the act of moving a message from one DTN node to another.  Routing 
   makes use of routing state (the RIB, or routing information base), 
   while forwarding makes use of state derived from routing, and is 
   maintained as forwarding state (the FIB, or forwarding information 
   base).  The structure of the FIB and the rules for maintaining it are 
   implementation choices. 
    
   The maintenance of state in the RIB is dependent on the type of 
   routing algorithm being used.  A routing algorithm may consider 
   requested class of service and the location of potential custodians 
   (for custody transfer, see section 3.10), and this information will 
   tend to increase the size of the RIB.  The separation between FIB and 
   RIB is not required by this document, as these are implementation 
   details to be decided by system implementers. The choice of routing 
   algorithms is still under study. 
    
4.4 Security-Related State 
 
   The infrastructure protection model described in this architecture 
   requires maintenance of state in all DTN nodes.  All nodes are 
   required to store their own private information (including their own 
 
Cerf, et al.             Expires January 2005                [Page 17] 
Internet Draft       draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-02.txt            July 2004 
 
   policy and authentication material) and a block of information used 
   to verify credentials. Further, in most cases, DTN nodes will cache 
   the public information (and possibly the credentials) of their next-
   hop (bundle) neighbors.  All cached information will have expiration 
   times, and nodes are responsible for acquiring and distributing 
   updates of public information and credentials prior to the expiration 
   of the old set (in order to avoid a disruption in network service).  
    
   In addition to basic authentication of applications and routers, 
   access control may be used in a DTN by one or more mechanisms such as 
   capabilities or access control lists (ACLs).  ACLs would represent 
   another block of state present in any node that wishes to enforce 
   security policy.  ACLs are typically initialized at node 
   configuration time and may be updated dynamically by DTN bundles or 
   by some out of band technique. 
    
   Some DTNs may implement security boundaries enforced by selected 
   nodes in the network, where application credentials may be checked in 
   addition to checking router credentials.  Public information used to 
   verify application authentication will typically be cached at these 
   points. 
    
   As with routing, the security approach is under development, so the 
   exact enumeration of the required state will depend on the particular 
   algorithms eventually selected for implementation. 
    
    
5  Application Structuring Issues 
    
   DTN bundle delivery is intended to operate in a delay-tolerant 
   fashion over a broad range of network types.  This does not mean 
   there *must* be delays in the network; it means there *may* be very 
   significant delays (including extended periods of disconnection 
   between sender and intended recipient).  The DTN protocols are delay 
   tolerant, so applications using them must also be delay-tolerant in 
   order to operate effectively in environments subject to significant 
   delay or disruption. 
    
   The services provided by the DTN architecture are based on 
   asynchronous, message-oriented communication which differs from 
   conversational communication.  In general, applications should 
   attempt to include enough information in a message so that it may be 
   treated as an independent unit of work by the receiving entity.  
   (This represents a form of "application data unit" [CT90] or 
   "transaction", although transactions carry connotations of multi-
   phase commitment that we do not intend here.)  The goal is to 
   minimize synchronous interchange between applications that are 
   separated by a network presenting long and possibly highly variable 
   delays.  A single file transfer request message, for example, might 
   include authentication information, file location information, and 
   requested file operation (thus "bundling" this information together). 
   Comparing this style of operation to a classic FTP transfer, one sees 
   that the bundled model can complete in one round trip, whereas an FTP 
 
Cerf, et al.             Expires January 2005                [Page 18] 
Internet Draft       draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-02.txt            July 2004 
 
   file "put" operation can take as many as eight round trips to get to 
   a point where file data can flow [DFS02].   
    
   Delay-tolerant applications must consider additional factors beyond 
   the conversational implications of long delay paths.  For example, an 
   application may terminate (voluntarily or not) between the time it 
   sends a message and the time it expects a response.  If this 
   possibility has been anticipated, the application can be "re-
   instantiated" with state information saved in persistent storage.  
   This is an implementation issue, but also an application design 
   consideration.   
    
   Some consideration of delay-tolerant application design can result in 
   applications that work reasonably well in low-delay environments, and 
   that do not suffer extraordinarily in high or highly-variable delay 
   environments. 
    
6  Convergence Layer Considerations for Use of Underlying Protocols 
 
   Implementation experience with the DTN architecture has revealed an 
   important architectural construct and interface for DTN routers.  Not 
   all transport protocols in different protocol families provide the 
   same exact functionality, so some additional adaptation or 
   augmentation on a per-stack basis may be required.  This adaptation 
   is accomplished by a set of convergence layers placed between the 
   bundle layer and underlying transport protocols. The convergence 
   layers manage the protocol-specific details of interfacing with a 
   particular transport service and present a consistent interface to 
   the bundle layer. 
    
   The complexity of a convergence layer may vary substantially 
   depending on the type of protocol stack it adapts.  For example, a 
   TCP/IP convergence layer for use in the Internet might only have to 
   add message boundaries to TCP streams, whereas a convergence layer 
   for some network where no reliable transport protocol exists would be 
   considerably more complex (e.g. it might have to implement 
   reliability, fragmentation, flow-control, etc.). 
 
7  Summary  
 
   The DTN architecture addresses many of the problems of heterogeneous 
   networks that must operate in environments subject to long delays and 
   discontinuous end-to-end connectivity.  It is based on asynchronous 
   messaging and uses postal mail as a model of service classes and 
   delivery semantics.  It accommodates many different forms of 
   connectivity, including scheduled, predicted, and opportunistically 
   connected links.  It introduces a novel approach to end-to-end 
   reliability across frequently partitioned and unreliable networks.  
   It also proposes a model for securing the network infrastructure 
   against unauthorized access.   
    
   It is our belief that this architecture is applicable to many 
   different types of challenged environments. 
 
Cerf, et al.             Expires January 2005                [Page 19] 
Internet Draft       draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-02.txt            July 2004 
 
    
8  Security Considerations 
    
   Security is an integral concern of the Delay Tolerant Network 
   Architecture.  Section 3.13 of this document presents an approach for 
   securing the DTN architecture.  These capabilities may also be useful 
   in providing facilities to DTN applications to construct their own 
   end-to-end security protocols. 
 
9  IANA Considerations 
    
   This document specifies the architecture for Delay Tolerant 
   Networking and does not itself require any actions from IANA. 
    
    
10 Normative References 
    
   [RFC3667]   Bradner, S., "IETF Rights in Contributions", BCP 78, RFC 
   3667, February 2004. 
    
   [RFC3668]   Bradner, S., "Intellectual Property Rights in IETF 
   Technology", BCP 79, RFC 3668, February 2004. 
 
    
11 Informative References 
    
   [SB03] S. Burleigh et al, "Delay-Tolerant Networking ¡ An Approach to 
   Interplanetary Internet," IEEE Communications Magazine, July 2003. 
    
   [FW03] F. Warthman, "Delay-Tolerant Networks (DTNs): A Tutorial 
   v1.1," Wartham Associates, 2003.  Available from 
   http://www.dtnrg.org. 
    
   [KF03] K. Fall, "A Delay-Tolerant Network Architecture for Challenged 
   Internets," Proceedings SIGCOMM, Aug 2003.   
    
   [JFP04] S. Jain, K. Fall, R. Patra, "Routing in a Delay Tolerant 
   Network," Proceedings SIGCOMM, Aug/Sep 2004. 
 
   [DFS02] R. Durst, P. Feighery, K. Scott, "Why not use the Standard 
   Internet Suite for the Interplanetary Internet?", MITRE White Paper, 
   2002. Available from http://www.ipnsig.org/reports/TCP_IP.pdf  
    
   [NEWARCH]  NewArch Project: Future-Generation Internet Architecture. 
   http://www.isi.edu/newarch  
    
   [IPNL] P. Francis, R. Gummadi, "IPNL: A NAT-Extended Internet 
   Architecture," Proceedings SIGCOMM, 2001. 
    
   [TRIAD] D. Cheriton, M. Gritter, "TRIAD: A new next generation 
   internet architecture," 2001. Available from 
   http://www-dsg.stanford.edu/triad/triad.ps.gz 
    
 
Cerf, et al.             Expires January 2005                [Page 20] 
Internet Draft       draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-02.txt            July 2004 
 
   [CK74]  V. Cerf, R. Kahn, "A  Protocol  for  Packet  Network 
   Intercommunication," IEEE  Trans. on  Comm., COM-22(5), May  1974. 
    
   [IGE00]  C. Intanagonwiwat, R. Govindan, D. Estrin, "Directed 
   Diffusion: A scalable and robust communication paradigm for sensor 
   networks," Proceedings MobiCOM, Aug 2000. 
    
   [WSBL99] W. Adjie-Winoto, E. Schwartz, H. Balakrishnan, J. Lilley, 
   "The design and implementation of an intentional naming system", 
   Proc. 17th ACM SOSP, Kiawah Island, SC, Dec. 1999. 
     
   [RJ90] R. Jain, "Congestion Control in Computer Networks:  Issues and 
   Trends," IEEE Network Magazine, May 1990. 
 
   [DSEC] R. Durst, "Infrastructure Security Model for Delay Tolerant 
   Networks," White paper in progress, July 2002.  Available from 
   http://www.dtnrg.org/papers/dtn-sec-wp-v5.pdf 
    
   [CT90] D. Clark, D. Tennenhouse, "Architectural Considerations for a 
   new generation of protocols," Proceedings SIGCOMM, 1990. 
 
 
Authors' Addresses 
    
   Dr. Vinton G. Cerf 
   MCI Corporation 
   22001 Loudoun County Parkway 
   Building F2, Room 4115, ATTN: Vint Cerf 
   Ashburn, VA 20147 
   Telephone +1 (703) 886-1690 
   FAX  +1 (703) 886-0047 
   Email vcerf@mci.net 
    
   Scott C. Burleigh 
   Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
   4800 Oak Grove Drive 
   M/S: 179-206 
   Pasadena, CA 91109-8099 
   Telephone +1 (818) 393-3353 
   FAX  +1 (818) 354-1075 
   Email Scott.Burleigh@jpl.nasa.gov 
    
   Robert C. Durst 
   The MITRE Corporation 
   7515 Colshire Blvd. 
   M/S H300 
   McLean, VA 22102 
   Telephone +1 (703) 883-7535 
   FAX +1 (703) 883-7142 
   Email durst@mitre.org 
    
    
    
 
Cerf, et al.             Expires January 2005                [Page 21] 
Internet Draft       draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-02.txt            July 2004 
 
    
   Dr. Kevin Fall 
   Intel Research, Berkeley 
   2150 Shattuck Ave., #1300 
   Berkeley, CA 94704 
   Telephone +1 (510) 495-3014 
   FAX +1 (510) 495-3049 
   Email kfall@intel.com 
    
   Adrian J.  Hooke 
   Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
   4800 Oak Grove Drive 
   M/S: 303-400 
   Pasadena, CA 91109-8099 
   Telephone +1 (818) 354-3063 
   FAX  +1 (818) 393-3575 
   Email Adrian.Hooke@jpl.nasa.gov 
    
   Dr. Keith L. Scott 
   The MITRE Corporation 
   7515 Colshire Blvd. 
   M/S H300 
   McLean, VA 22102 
   Telephone +1 (703) 883-6547 
   FAX +1 (703) 883-7142 
   Email kscott@mitre.org 
    
   Leigh Torgerson 
   Jet Propulsion Laboratory 
   4800 Oak Grove Drive 
   M/S: T1710- 
   Pasadena, CA 91109-8099 
   Telephone +1 (818) 393-0695 
   FAX  +1 (818) 354-9068 
   Email Leigh.Torgerson@jpl.nasa.gov 
    
   Howard S. Weiss 
   SPARTA, Inc. 
   9861 Broken Land Parkway 
   Columbia, MD 21046 
   Telephone +1 (410) 381-9400 x201 
   FAX  +1 (410) 381-5559 
   Email hsw@sparta.com 
    
   Please refer comments to dtn-interest@mailman.dtnrg.org.  The Delay 
   Tolerant Networking Research Group (DTNRG) web site is located at 
   http://www.dtnrg.org. 
    
    
 
 
 
 
 
Cerf, et al.             Expires January 2005                [Page 22] 
Internet Draft       draft-irtf-dtnrg-arch-02.txt            July 2004 
 
 
Copyright Notice 
    
   Copyright (C) The Internet Society (2004).  This document is subject 
   to the rights, licenses and restrictions contained in BCP 78, and 
   except as set forth therein, the authors retain all their rights. 
    
    
Disclaimer 
    
   This document and the information contained herein are provided on an 
   "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE REPRESENTS 
   OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY AND THE INTERNET 
   ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, 
   INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE 
   INFORMATION HEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED 
   WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 
    
    
Intellectual Property 
    
   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed to 
   pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described in 
   this document or the extent to which any license under such rights 
   might or might not be available; nor does it represent that it has 
   made any independent effort to identify any such rights.  Information 
   on the procedures with respect to rights in RFC documents can be 
   found in BCP 78 and BCP 79. 
    
   Copies of IPR disclosures made to the IETF Secretariat and any 
   assurances of licenses to be made available, or the result of an 
   attempt made to obtain a general license or permission for the use of 
   such proprietary rights by implementers or users of this 
   specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR repository at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 
    
   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   this standard.  Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-
   ipr@ietf.org. 
    
    
Release Statement 
    
   By submitting this Internet-Draft, the authors accept the provisions 
   of Section 4 of RFC 3667. 
    
    




 
Cerf, et al.             Expires January 2005                [Page 23] 